- In a first of its kind study,
the psychoactive drug MDMA
was just shown to
be exceptionally
effective in
treating alcoholism,
offering new hope
for a frustratingly
difficult to treat condition.
This is "Gaia News."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
- As scientific evidence for
the efficacy of psychedelics
in treating mental
health disorders mounts,
researchers have now turned
to studying the potential
for their treatment
of addictions.
Alongside a new study
showing the success
of the psychedelic ketamine
in dramatically reducing
alcoholic relapse,
another study recently
examined the use of
MDMA-assisted therapy.
Dr. Ben Sessa is a psychiatrist
and Chief Medical Officer
at Awakn Life Sciences, a
British biotech company that
is at the forefront of research,
development, and delivery
of psychedelic medicines.
The company was involved
in the ketamine study
and led the MDMA study on
Alcohol Use Disorder, or AUD.
- Phenyl
Methylenedioxymethamphetamine,
MDMA, is a
phenylethylamine which
has mild psychedelic
properties but primarily
what we call
entactogenic properties.
It's a particularly
useful tool for
trauma-focused psychotherapy.
It switches off
the amygdala, which
is the fear center in the
brain, which allows a patient
to reflect upon and recall
painful traumatic memories
that they would normally
avoid and suppress.
So this, in many ways,
makes it the Holy Grail
for trauma-focused therapy.
And I've always thought
of AUD as essentially
PTSD plus alcohol
in so many cases.
So we decided to see-- let's see
if MDMA-assisted psychotherapy
would work for AUD.
- In the study, participants who
had just completed an alcohol
detox program received an
eight-week course of treatment
with MDMA in combination
with psychotherapy.
Both researchers
and participants
were amazed by the results.
- When we followed that
group up to nine months,
around 20% of them had
returned to pre-detox levels
of drinking.
Relapse to drinking
after getting dry
is around 80% to
90% at 12 months.
That's an embarrassingly
poor statistic.
So this difference
between 80% and 20%
is staggering and
absolutely is far and away
above the current gold standard
treatment for alcoholism.
- The mechanism behind how
MDMA-assisted therapy works is
fascinating.
- So MDMA works across a
number of different receptors.
What you get is a reduction
in anxiety and depression,
increased original
thinking, an arousal zone
perfect for psychotherapy,
and high levels
of empathy and compassion
for self and others.
And this switching
off of the amygdala
makes it so crucial it allows
you to selectively focus
upon difficult memories,
but your other faculties
are kept intact.
So you can carry
out psychotherapy
during the drug
experience, which
allows patients
who had previously
been stuck and unable
to move forward
to talk about these
difficult things
that they've been carrying
around since their childhood.
Which then allows
them to understand
why they're drinking,
and they no longer
need to use alcohol as a
form of self-medication
against these
traumatic memories.
- Researchers like Dr. Sessa are
quite excited about the future
of psychedelic therapies and
passionate about the need
for further exploration.
- I think as we go
forward into the future,
we are going to see all of
these psychedelic drugs,
whether it's LSD, DMT, ketamine,
MDMA, psilocybin, all of them
will eventually become approved.
And they will all be
available for a wide range
of mental disorders.
Because psychedelic
medicine is really
going to be the
future of psychiatry.
The top-down biological model
of the last 40 or 50 years
is quite clearly not
solving the problem
of the epidemic growing mental
health problems, particularly
addictions.
Patients deserve more than
just daily maintenance,
drugs that paper over the
cracks and keep symptoms at bay.
Patients deserve upfront,
intensive, effective, creative
combinations of psychotherapy
and pharmacology
that allow the patient to get to
the root cause of the problem,
put it to bed, and get
on with their lives.
And psychedelic
therapies are the most
innovative and exciting
forms of medicine
that's come out of the
last 75 years of research.
And it's an enormous
privilege and pleasure
to be part of this movement.
- For a new perspective,
this is "Gaia News."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]